---
layout: post
title: "How is Machine Learning Applicable in Material Science?"
date: 2017-11-03
---
A few weeks ago, a colleague asked me - “How Machine Learning is Applicable Material Science?”. It got me interested, because these are two topics, I understand very well. We both studied Computational Material Science (Material Informatics), utilized python and other tools to build models, evaluated terabytes of data from simulations, used statistical mechanics and numerical methods to extract useful insights on the structure-property relationships of material. Indeed, machine learning methods, sounds familiar to a computational material scientist, but it is an elusive familiarity.  In this blog, I will examine areas in which machine learning and computation material science intertwine.
> *Simply put, materials make things happen*

### Material Science and its effect on society.

When you look at the advancement of society, civilization has evolved with the advancement of material development. (stone age,>iron age> bronze age,>silicon>graphene(carbon)). Thus, Material scientists, have the privilege of shaping society. They tailor material properties to create custom, or brand-new materials with specific properties for specific applications. This is done by first understanding the microstructures, and then changing it to adopt to certain condition (temperatures, stress) for a particular application (computers, transport etc). Our everyday existence in influence by materials, from Silicon chips store data in billionths of a second, to new alloys for automobile engines, to solar panels for renewable energy. Indeed, advances in materials shape our day-to-day lives and drive economic growth. Simply put materials make things happen.

Until recently, advances in materials were accomplished by extensive laboratory testing combined with a healthy dose of guesswork, a time-consuming and often costly approach. There is a faster way, thanks to advances in computers and increase in computational power. Propelled by Materials Genome Initiative; algorithmic developments; and the unquestionable successes of data-driven efforts in other domains, informatics strategies are beginning to take shape within materials science. Using material properties data and advanced computer models, engineers can realistically simulate the behavior of new materials in specific applications and avoid lengthy cycles of build and test.  These simulations cover a wide range of operating environments and length and time scales. The new field, called computational materials science, is one of the fastest growing areas within the field of chemistry and materials science.
